Good afternoon.
We're going to hear about
the Java Virtual Machine.
I am trying to gear this talk a
little bit towards those who may
never have seen Java on Apple and
those of you sort of in the middle
who have seen a little bit of Java,
particularly on Apple.
And then some of the talk should be
for those of you who have seen Java on
Apple for quite a while now and just
want to know what's really new and
what's interesting and what's different.
So a little bit of a gauge,
I want to know whether anybody
in this audience other than
the people who work for me was
actually saw my talk last year.
Okay, so, all right.
A few.
Well, you're not going to
hear last year's talk,
although I did steal one slide from it.
But today, this year,
what we're going to talk about is an
overview of what the VM is all about,
what it does, what it does well.
We're going to talk a little
bit about where we've gone
from last year at this time.
[Transcript missing]
First assertion.
So what does a Java VM do?
A Java VM basically does four things.
It
First of all, the first thing is that
it executes bytecodes.
You write your Java code once, right,
and it gets turned into .class files
which get sucked into jar files.
And in theory,
you're supposed to be able to
ship those jar files anywhere
on the planet on any machine.
And they're supposed to run and
they're supposed to do the same thing.
So in order for those jar
files to do the same thing,
you need an engine to actually interpret
those bytecodes and make it and do it
in exactly the same way on that machine.
So that's mostly what the virtual
machine is aimed at doing,
is implementing those bytecodes.
That's what everybody thinks
about the first time when they
think about what a Java VM does.
The other things it has to do, though,
is it has to manage its own threads,
you know, the threads on the system,
because part of Java is lots of threads,
right, synchronization and all
those kinds of things.
VM has to deal with memory management.
Those of you coming from a C or
C++ environment know all about
what I'm talking about here.
We take care of your garbage for you.
We spend our mental cycles figuring
out how to do that so that you don't
have to spend cycles on that and you
can spend your cycles thinking about
the problem you're trying to solve.
The last thing I consider a VM,
in a broad sense,
of having responsibility for is
going outside the machine into,
back into C code for
one reason or another.
And both going out into C,
but also being able to be
called into from C at times.
So a VM manages these four things.
It has to do it well,
or we want it to do it well,
so that your code runs and runs
very efficiently on the system
that we give you with Mac OS X.
So the real question,
or the thing that I want to try to
get across in this part of the talk
is I want to give you a measure a
little bit about how well we do Java,
the Java virtual machine on Mac OS X.
A few weeks ago, we had Java 1,
which is where you learn all about Java.
And I was kind of surprised to see
that Java Pro had picked us as one of
their finalists for the best Java VM.
I thought that was pretty neat.
And so --
We were finalists.
We didn't actually walk
off with the total reward,
but that got me to thinking,
and that led to this slide, in fact.
We are, by perhaps some people's opinion,
you know, the best of breed for Java VMs.
I put a question mark up there,
not because I doubt it, because I know,
but it's really for you guys to decide,
right?
So I'd like to make this assertion,
see whether or not I can, you know,
this hypothesis or whatever,
and I'll let you guys figure out,
and you can come to your own
conclusions as to whether this is true.
So I'm going to be talking
about these four things,
or these four areas, and in fact,
these are going to support those
four theses that I think that
a Java VM has to do altogether.
So first of all,
advanced language integration.
We have,
in addition to the JNI that you all
know and love from any other platform,
we have two other systems that allow
you to not even think about JNI because
we do the JNI thinking for you.
The first of those is JDIRECT.
JDIRECT allows you to, from Java,
access C function calls.
Well, C++ if you could really
get the naming right,
but for the most part,
C libraries and whatnot.
So you can write a little bit of
Java code that basically says,
open a file.
And you'll get back an integer
that's your file descriptor.
And you can write data to it.
And you can get, well,
you can't get to Erno,
but you can get the read
result back from that.
And the fun thing about that
is you don't have to write
any JNI code to get to that.
And that's because we do that for
you with a facility we call JDIRECT.
It actually writes the stubs on the web.
It writes the stubs on the fly
using sort of the type information
that you provide in Java native,
in your declaration of
a Java native method.
And we build the JNI stubs
for you on the fly.
A different category of language
integration we provide is
that from the Java bridge.
It turns out that...
If you went to the job overview,
you heard James Gosling say that,
you know, there were a few guys from
Next who went over to this thing
called First Person and they
took some of their ideas along.
Well, it turns out that a lot of those
ideas got reflected in Java.
So the Objective-C runtime model,
the object model and runtime model
are almost identical to Java.
So we've been working with this
technology for a long time.
And what that allows us to
do is essentially map one
for one the Cocoa classes and
methods into Java counterparts.
And we use the Java Bridge technology
to write what for us are those
JNI wrappers in a very neat way
such that you can actually subclass.
So all of Cocoa comes
up with a Java face.
So there's Java,
there's an NS application,
there's an NS view,
and you can subclass it in Java.
And, you know, when you do super,
the method goes across
the bridge into the native
Objective-C stuff and things happen.
So you can subclass NS view from
Java and we make use of Cocoa underneath.
Pretty neat trick.
That's the kind of language integration
that we think is a big value add.
This is nothing new for us.
We've had both of these technologies
for several years now and they both
shipped last year with Mac OS XO.
I won't go into them anymore.
There's release notes and our email
addresses and all discussion lists
and stuff that can talk about this.
Let me talk about the
Java virtual machine itself.
We did superb language integration.
The next thing is the
virtual machine itself.
We use the Hotspot
virtual machine from Sun.
Sun provides us with
this huge pile of code,
700 files of C++, tightly designed,
well abstracted.
It's our job to make it run on
our PowerPC architecture on our
Darwin Mach BSD system underneath.
The neat thing about the Hotspot virtual
machine technology is that it is years,
has been years in refinement.
We get most of the benefits of that
refinement without us having to add
all that much innovation in terms of
how it decides when to do a bytecode,
when to do this, when to do that.
We get it up and running on
our Mac OS X system and do the
small job of the PowerPC part,
which turns out to be 70% of the work.
In any case,
it's tuned such that only 10%
of your time is really running
on the Hotspot virtual machine.
The next thing we want to
talk about is the interpreter.
The interpreter, as I say,
is on the fly built,
which means that we can take advantage.
Every time you start up Java,
we create a new interpreter for you.
We make that interpreter different
based on whether you're on a G3 or
a G4 or whether you're on a single
processor or on a multi-processor.
So that interpreter can be really tuned.
The other one that we see a lot is
whether you're running debug mode or not.
If you're running debug mode,
the interpreter for every little,
you know, bytecode has an extra branch in
there to find out whether or not
you're being--whether you have a
break point or other things going on.
These--this is very advanced
technology even for the interpreter.
So it has to run fast but
the real bulk of your code,
the bulk of time spent in your
code is done in the compiled stuff,
where we take those bytecodes
and we on the fly compile them,
hopefully without any pause times
while you're running your app,
visible pause times that is,
into a fairly small amount of code
relative to the size of your application.
We've really only measured about two
megabytes worth of compilation time.
So you can compile code at any time.
That is just really awesome stuff.
I'll talk a little bit more about
compiler stuff later in this talk and
then on Friday there'll be another
talk where you'll learn--you can learn
even more about--and about why you
need to know a little bit about it.
The other thing about Hotspot--
It has a patented low cost
synchronization mechanism such that
if you have synchronized methods,
there's virtually no cost to using them.
So you use them liberally.
Use them freely.
If there's no two threads
contending for it,
it's virtually costless.
We make it as cheap as we
can for the CPU you're on.
For the PowerPC, that is darn cheap.
There's only a traditional
expense of a big,
heavy,
go to the kernel and wait kind of stop
when there's actual contention on things.
So the finer grained your locks are,
the less likely you're
going to get contended.
Part of the patent has to do with the
fact that there's no memory overhead
for the synchronization either.
You can synchronize on
any object within Java,
but we don't have an
extra lock word for that.
We build the lock word on the fly,
on the stack.
It's very neat.
And of course,
Hotspot brings with it a state
of the art generational GC.
Last year I talked about that
in a fair amount of detail.
This year I'll talk a little
somewhat less about it,
but give you some of the high points.
Tight OS integration.
We know our OS.
Hotspot comes, I mean,
it's like a hand in a glove.
Hotspot on top of
Mac OS X is just so tight,
it's beautiful.
The threads are one to one,
files are one to one, I/O is one to one.
It is like the Java virtual
machine is just right a thin
layer above the operating system.
It's really neat because that
way the operating system guys
get to do the scheduling stuff.
The operating system guys
get to do the I/O buffering.
The operating system guys get to
do all the stuff that they do well.
And, you know, from the VM viewpoint,
we just hand that work off to them.
We like that part a lot.
We use, for example, we have some tricks.
We know the kernel guys.
We ask them for favors.
So in certain places where
on other VMs you would see,
you know, code expansion to do, you know,
like null pointer exceptions,
that's what MPE is there.
We actually put a little
trap word in place--well,
we actually take a fault.
We take a memory access
fault from the kernel.
It's turned into a Mach exception.
We intercept it.
We say, "Hmm,
this is an area that we know about.
That was a null pointer exception."
In other places we insert actual
trap instructions and take those,
fault those, handle those,
and deal with that.
What that gives us, again,
is gives you very fast code paths and
you only pay for them when you use them.
So the basic advice here as
you've read in any Java program
is don't program using exceptions.
And it's because they're very
expensive and that's the design point.
The last thing we do is a little thing,
but Mach was a design,
one of the designers of
Mach was Avi Tavanian,
who you may have heard of or seen before.
And one of the things he did with Mach is
give it a great virtual memory subsystem.
So part of the virtual memory subsystem
is the idea that when our garbage
collector is done with a whole chunk
of memory and we no longer want it,
it's in our address space and
typically it would get swapped out
to the disk once we stopped using it.
But what we do is we tell the OS, "Hey,
we don't need those pages anymore.
We want to keep the addresses, you know,
reserved.
But we don't need the dirty bits
behind it." And so the OS just kind of
starts using those pages right away.
The next time we start faulting it,
it gives us zero-filled pages.
So it's just little tricks like that.
We try to, you know, use them wherever we
can so that you guys,
who program in Java,
just don't have to worry about any
of these little nasty little details
that make a lot of difference.
CPU utilization.
Not only do we know our OS,
we know our CPUs.
As I said before,
the code gen that our compiler does as
well as our interpreter varies based
on whether you're on a multiprocessor
system or on a single processor system,
whether you're on a G3 or
whether you're on a G4.
What could be better?
You don't have to pick
your processor type.
You know, as a compiler group,
we don't have to pick something
that works everywhere even
though--and best on one but,
you know,
not as great on another kind of thing.
We can do the best job
for you at runtime,
and we try to.
For example, last year we introduced the
use of the Velocity Engine,
which is on G4 chips, for fast copying.
The Velocity Engine can soak the
memory bandwidth coming out of
the chip like nothing else can.
A tight loop cannot drive memory
faster than the Velocity Engine.
We use that to copy bits.
It was so good, in fact,
that we've handed that code off and
it's now at the base of Mac OS X and
is used for -- is it MemCopy or B-Copy?
It's MemCopy.
It's based for MemCopy and Jaguar.
Some of our ideas are done so well
that they're even getting picked
up elsewhere within our system.
On the G4, the G4 has a lot of registers.
So when we compile things,
we don't have to follow
the ABI that was laid down,
you know, how many years ago when they
designed the PowerPC chip.
We have our own ABI, you know,
where registers get, you know,
where the parameters go, where locals go.
And so we actually dedicate the use
of a few registers for things that
make interpreting and compiling
Java and running Java even faster.
One of the other uses for
registers is cache locals,
of course.
This is a standard compiler technique.
If you have a lot of registers,
you just dedicate or you get to use some
of them for local variables and whatnot.
We've introduced that in our hotspot
technology in the 10.1 timeframe.
We, another little nifty-ism,
the CPU has, the CPU chip has sort of a
countdown timer on it or actually
a continually clocking timer.
And so we gauge and make use of that
for use when we do get time millis.
So when you need to do
timing of your stuff,
we don't have to go to the
system to make use of that.
We can interpolate from the system and
use of the clock register directly such
that our get time millis is bloody fast.
We were actually talking in the hallway
earlier this afternoon about not even
having to go to a subroutine for that,
but actually inlining it every time
you use it inside your compiled code.
No promises on that one,
but it's an idea for us to explore.
Let me talk about this.
So the thesis is we do a really
good job with the compiler,
with the OS, with the CPU.
What better way to show it than to
Cook up a micro benchmark.
A micro benchmark,
most people call them benchmarks.
[Transcript missing]
Now, the reason I like this benchmark in
particular is that it's multi threads,
there's contention,
there's that garbage collection going on,
and then you got the effect of the
compiler coming in when you run it enough
so you're actually compiling this code.
So it shows all those four things
I think a VM has to do well.
We have to run it on a
dual processor machine,
of course.
And the famous note
about micro benchmarks,
it's a contrived usage pattern.
Your mileage will be way less.
Don't look at this as being anything
representative of speed advantages
you're going to see in your program.
But let's see what happens with this.
So between C, C++, and Objective-C,
let me explain the slide a little bit.
The vertical column
measures peak allocations,
cumulative,
I mean total allocations per second.
[Transcript missing]
When we compare Java to this, however,
we have to change the scale on the graph.
The, what we provided to you in 10.1
for a single threaded was 8,000
allocations a second as opposed to 700.
So that's over 10 times faster.
Note that as soon as we go to
a multi-threaded case though,
Java's allocation rate
drops significantly,
more than half.
But even so,
we get 3,000 allocations per second
in the multi-threaded contended case.
And you see that it's basically linear.
No matter how many threads you get, the,
you know, the total number of allocations
really doesn't drop off.
That's really what you want to see.
For
We've done a little bit better.
In fact, we've doubled the
contended allocation rate.
And I'll tell you a little bit
about how we did that as we go on.
Memory utilization.
Pre-Mac OS X, 10.0,
and all other Java systems today.
have the following issue.
JAR files are not shared libraries.
The classes.jar that contains
swing is not a shared library.
Every app has to read those system JARs,
has to process those system JARs.
They're compressed, remember.
Has to build up data structures
to make use of those -- make use
of the data that's within them.
And, you know,
literally it keeps a copy of all
those byte codes in every application.
In Mac OS 10.0 last year,
we introduced a technology known
as the shared generation to help
resolve some of these issues.
A hotspot garbage collector,
GC garbage collector,
that we get is a very
sophisticated garbage collector.
What it tries to do is spend as few
cycles allocating an object as it can,
because most objects die young.
And if they're not dead,
it spends as few cycles as possible
remembering that they're alive.
And so what they do is they
provide essentially four stages,
four different types of generations
where in the first stage,
the first generation,
the fastest generation,
it's essentially a pointer bump.
Now, in Mac OS 10.0 and 10.1,
there was a little bit of a
lock around that pointer bump.
And in Jaguar,
actually in the Java update,
there is no lock for now.
And that's where we got
our doubled performance.
The other generations,
two-space copy is where things
live for a little while.
And tenured is where your
objects live when they're adults.
Now, the permanent generation is kind
of a hotspot implementation detail,
in that all those byte codes and
stuff that you get out of class files,
that stuff lives, that metadata lives in
the permanent generation.
The shared generation idea
we introduced last year was
that those metadata objects,
those bytecodes,
many of them don't even change
and they essentially never die.
So we added sort of an
immortal generation.
What we do is we pre-process
the system jars once,
reading in all those byte
codes and strings and class
tables and all that stuff.
And if you ever watch
your Mac OS X machine,
you might see this fleeting message,
building Java shared archive.
Well, that's actually when we cook it.
We cook it when you boot your system.
So we cook up all that data,
we write it out to disk,
and every other time you launch Java,
we just M-map that region in,
do a little bit of patch up, and run.
And so, guess what?
None of that time is
spent reading those IOs.
We get to share some of that memory.
It's just a total win.
I'll talk a little bit more about it.
So Apple's Hotspot Garbage
Collector has that shared
generation as a new technology.
technology at the bottom.
So this is a very busy graph.
I won't go into it in detail.
If you look at the middle graph,
that purple area is the region
we use for all those byte
codes and things like that.
And as I said before,
we split it into a couple regions.
One's totally read-only, totally shared.
The other one is shared
until it's written to.
And then for dynamically
discovered class files and stuff,
you still have a bit of purple.
So your code goes in the area,
the purple area at the very beginning.
Now, the really neat thing about this
[Transcript missing]
and We spend zero cycles on them.
I mean, how fewer cycles can you get,
right?
Zero is zero.
It doesn't get better than that.
And so we see that in terms of
running time of your application.
Our full GC times are lower for the--when
we're running the shared GC stuff.
We get a, there's some benefit,
not as much as we'd like in terms of
packing because of the way we arrange,
you know,
we can load methods that are actually
used instead of the entire class and
including the methods that you don't use.
So there's some memory
packing benefits as well.
The coolest thing on here is
that Apple's shared generation
technology may well become Suns.
[Transcript missing]
Timeline.
Let me shift.
Let me talk a little bit about, okay,
so this is the end of the part where,
you know, best of breed.
You've seen this stuff.
You can, you know, sit back,
think about it.
Make your own decisions.
Let me talk about a few of
the things that we've done
since we spoke to you last.
In September, we shipped Java 1.3.1.
1.3.1 was a huge amount of work for
us because it was a whole different
generation of the Hotspot compiler.
So we actually had to work long,
hard hours to get 1.3.1 out to you,
even though it was a .1 release.
It provided practical debugging.
130 did not.
130 did not provide much
of a working JVM PI,
the profiling interface.
131 did.
We introduced,
not only got all that stuff going,
but we introduced the
velocity engine use,
we introduced cache locals,
and we improved our shared
generation technology above and
beyond what we did in Cheetah 10.0.
We've been working on 1.4, as you know,
but that didn't stop us from doing
some things and shipping them
in our 1.3.1 update that went
out just a couple months ago.
We extended the shared generation
to include constant pools.
If you know what class file formats are,
you know what this is.
But basically,
we figured out a way to avoid
even more garbage collection
cycles by sharing even more data.
And so those benefits are just there
without you guys having to lift a finger.
We added something
called thread local Eden.
It's not on by default.
You have to trigger it
yourself in this update.
And the way you trigger
it is that little,
that funny little command line argument.
We believe we're going to be
providing a handout at the,
at our talk on Friday and we'll try to
put some of those tricks on that handout.
If not, well,
you'll know where to find me because my
email is going to be up on the slide.
The other thing we did was
we had some complaints.
People would bring scripts over,
you know,
jar files that just worked except
the shell script would like die
because they had dash server on their,
you know, Java invocation line.
So we decided we ought to at least fix
dash server such that it didn't complain.
But we did a little bit more than that
and we actually started tuning it for
what we consider to be server usage.
Java Dash Server is not,
as it is on other systems,
a different compiler.
It is, at the moment,
just a bit of tuning.
We do realize, though,
that servers run longer and we
probably should do more in terms of
compilation than we do right now.
But Java Dash Server is just the start of
where we're going to be going with that.
If you took a look at,
if you saw Steve's keynote,
it appears that we're actually
maybe going to start selling some,
you know, server hardware as well beyond
server software that we have.
So we're going to see more and
more interest in that as we go on.
The thread local lead,
and let me back up a bit, that was,
as I said before, the main we,
the main method or mechanism by which we
got that doubled allocation performance.
We have provided multiple JDK capability.
This means
Thank you for watching.
I'll see you next time.
How we do this is pretty much
the way we've done it before.
We have one symlink in the system in the
magic place that points to either a 131
tree of things or a 14 tree of things.
The only difference that you should
probably see is that the header files
are actually now part of that tree.
So there's a 131 JNI.h and a 14
JNI.h and they're in different
places just as they should be.
We have some support for actually
allowing you to bind an application
to one or the other of these VMs.
You should look for that
in the release notes.
We're not sure we're ever
going to ship this this way,
but we're at least
thinking maybe we might.
We'd like to get your input as to whether
or not you see that as a requirement.
Or whether you think that's nice to
have or what you think about that.
The other thing we're doing for
Jaguar is providing or making use
of the two-level namespace feature
that got introduced in 10.1.
So the main impact to you folks
is that if you build JNI libs,
they no longer have to be bundles.
They can be dilibs.
So they can export symbols to other
libraries and other frameworks as well.
So a consequence of two-level
namespace is that you really
should never link directly against
a particular version of Hotspot.
You should only link against the
JNI stub library that we have there.
And then our launcher will pick
the right VM for you to use.
A little thing, a nice thing.
We are taking advantage of some
rearrangements of memory that are
going on within the rest of Jaguar.
We help motivate some of that,
such that in terms of the
four gigabyte address space,
Apple is no longer scattering
things all through it.
So we're trying to clean up some
big chunk of it so that the net
effect for you folks who buy
1.5 gigabytes of memory in your
servers is you can use most of it.
So I think,
I don't think that's quite in place
in the Jaguar that you see right now,
but you should just know
that we're working on that.
So that will be there by
the time Jaguar ships.
We, you know,
if only I had good sound effects.
EIEIO is an instruction on the CPU.
And we figured out how to use it.
It turns out that a combination of that
instruction and one other is actually
faster for doing synchronization
than what we've been doing before.
So, like I said,
when we figure these things out,
we can roll them in and your code
gets better without you touching it.
So, if only I could, you know,
bring in a McDonald's song in here.
But anyway,
we could all break out in chorus,
The last thing we did,
we updated to 13103.
Every now and then we get these little
security updates and stuff like that.
And so we roll them in, fold them in,
and get them out as quick as we can.
So those are the things
you're going to see in Jaguar.
Oh yeah.
Last year I mentioned that
there was a third collector,
the train collector, the incremental GC,
and that we hadn't done
really much testing at it.
And I said, test it.
If this works for you, ship with it.
Well,
somebody went off and actually did that,
and they found out that it didn't work.
So again, if you have code coming
in from other systems,
what we've done is we've,
unfortunately we haven't
actually fixed it,
but we've at least disabled
it so that it can work.
So the Inc.
GC doesn't eventually cause
your program to crash.
So that's an outstanding bug on our part.
But you can use the option.
It's just ignored.
[Transcript missing]
First of all, there's a whole talk.
1.4 is coming along with some
technology that we're going to use
to make running your programs better.
and there's going to be stuff
that you have to use to make
your programs run better.
You'll have to go to that talk
to find out more of the detail.
I'll give you two slides worth of an
overview of what's going on in that talk.
If you want to make
your program run faster,
my best advice is to go buy
a professional tool for that.
We've worked with the folks that
optimize it and they have recently
been acquired by JBuilder and
that does really nice things.
If you don't--you do all
of these if you want.
More the better, right?
I believe HP has a public domain
HP Prof program that interprets
the standard output of Java stuff.
I believe that's a free download,
and it uses just the
standard APIs as well.
Of course, JVM Profiling Interface.
If you really know what you're doing,
you can write your own, you know,
event monitoring things and
keep track of particular heavy,
you know, items yourself.
The built-in profilers are, you know,
basically no different except
we've actually tested them
and made sure they work.
And they come in three flavors.
There's basic CPU and
monitor profiling with
[Transcript missing]
yet another more single thread
profiling facility called XPROF.
The interesting thing about that
one is it actually shows you when
methods get compiled and when
they're interpreted and stuff,
and so you can use that
for various diagnostics.
So the details from all of these
are really tedious to learn
and understand and make use of,
and that's why at the top of the
slide before I said go buy a tool,
because that integrates it,
turns it into graphs,
gives you a visual sense
of what's going on.
That's really my
recommendation on this one.
Beyond Jaguar.
1.4.
60% more stuff in 1.4
than what was in 1.3.
There's just piles of stuff.
The guy who wrote,
writes the Java in a Nutshell series,
Flanagan, David Flanagan, I believe,
has a list out on the web.
That's the URL to it.
It's his top ten features in Java 1.4.
There's parsing and transforming of XML.
There's a new preferences API.
There's logging API.
There's sockets, secure sockets.
He had a real thing for linked hash map.
I don't know why.
I think it was because
he needed a tenth thing.
Read the article.
Memory map files, non-blocking I/O,
regular expressions,
and language assertions.
These are all really neat things in 1.4.
and they're all available in our preview.
Top 10 things are there
in our preview for
The preview contains the
Hotspot Client Compiler.
The Client Compiler is not done yet.
It doesn't make any
mistakes that we know of,
but its performance is not...
[Transcript missing]
Almost all of those classes,
all the classes you saw on the
previous slide plus bunches of
others we didn't have room for,
those are in the classes.
The UI, the GUI stuff,
the new classes for GUI is not there.
What we've done instead is taken the
131 GUI classes and repackaged them.
Now there's a separate copy of them.
It's not like we're just
shifting the VM underneath.
So there's a separate
copy of the UI classes.
The reason this is important, I think,
is that for you to take advantage
of all those NIO facilities,
to start writing your XML stuff
and doing all that kinds of stuff,
it would be good if you could
have an app that basically ran.
So you could take your
existing 1.3 based app,
start making use of all those other
APIs that are now available to you,
and when we
When we're ready to show
you the 1.4 UI classes,
then you'll be three steps ahead.
So that's the idea in terms of
putting together this packaging.
You get it by going to
developer.apple.com/java.
There's a download section.
Look for WWDC downloads.
And actually I had a question.
Has anybody actually gone and done this?
Has anybody installed Jaguar
and gone and put one four up?
We have one brave soul in the audience.
Okay.
You can ask him questions later.
Use it.
We have a little,
a trivial little shell script
that flips that one magic
symlink between 130 and 140.
Compiler.
Now this is the slide,
one of the two slides that kind
of is a preview of what you'll
hear about in more detail later.
There's a big feature in the 1.4
compiler called deoptimization.
What this allows is for your compiled and
running code to have really deep inlining
so that this method calls that method,
calls that method.
We can just take all of those,
roll them up into one big special
purpose function and execute it.
So we don't have to do all those
server-tank call overheads.
Well, with 1.4 what we do,
in 1.3 we can only do that for final
methods and for static methods.
In 1.4 we do it for almost any method.
And the only problem we would
get into is if somebody loaded,
dynamically loaded a
jar that had a class,
subclass of something that we
aggressively inlined and in fact
that re-implemented one of those
methods such that our compiled
code isn't going to call out to
that dynamically loaded class.
So what do we do?
We've got this code and it's running,
it's compiled,
and so what we do is we throw it away.
And we replace the call frames on
the stack with--we call it in to our
interpreter such that when you fall down
the stack you start implementing the
interpreter for all of those methods.
So if you've--you're in
the middle of this inline,
you know, 60 method,
you'll end up with five frames of
interpreter on your stack frame.
So this gives us the ability to inline,
aggressively inline non-final methods.
If--how many of you saw the
Grand Canyon fly-through demo?
So there's a part of that where--so
that was based on GL for Java.
There's a part of that where they'd
flip a switch and it would go to 1.3.
And the truth of it is,
it was really only using
the I/O facilities from 1.3.
Because our compiler could not have
compiled that innermost loop and you
would not have gotten that speed,
even half the speed that you
saw there for the 1.3 part.
So that compilation
part's really important.
The other thing that it allows
is full speed debugging,
which means that your code runs and gets
compiled and when you hit a break point,
only the routines that need the
break point are interpreted.
And that is a lot faster
than what you have now,
which is when you do debugging,
you have to do it wholly
in interpreter mode.
So we're really excited
about this feature.
Oh, I wish I could go back.
Let me try down.
Second big thing is the low level
intermediate representation.
Basically inside the compiler there's
another layer that maps better
to our instruction streams and
so we can map or we can map and do
better optimizations at the bottom.
So you'll hear more about
that and why from that at the
Java performance talk on Friday.
There's three of those many APIs I want
to talk about a little bit here.
First one is native buffers.
What is,
what is native buffers all about?
You've got memory.
You fill up memory in the
regular heap with data of some
kind and to use it in Java,
you have to copy it into the Java heap.
Once it's in the Java heap,
it might migrate from one generation
to another so it gets copied yet again.
This is a lot of copying.
So native buffers allow
you to represent bits.
that are allocated out of the
C heap with a Java object.
The Java object,
it's not a language array.
It's like an NSArray.
You have to use methods to get to the
bytes and words and stuff within it.
But we use a compiler trick such
that whenever you compile codes
that use those accessor methods,
we compile in the access to it because
we recognize that magic class such
that you get array-like performance.
So this is another almost kind of
a language integration feature.
And that gives us really high-speed
ability to map and do I.O.
and not waste memory for that.
The new I.O.
package makes use of
those native buffers.
for its IO operations.
There's also support for IPv6,
support for non-blocking IO.
We put together an
implementation of preferences.
And in fact, to show you and talk a
little bit about that stuff,
I thought we'd have our own little demo.
So at this time,
I'd like to bring up Greg Parker,
who actually implemented
most of that stuff.
And where you saw in the
Grand Canyon demo issues
about how to do memory mapping
and the ability to represent those
objects out on the video cards memory.
What Greg's going to talk about
is network I/O and how we use this
package to do faster networking.
Take over.
All right,
so the first thing I'm going to show you
is a little bit of that JUs command that
we told you about that allows you to
switch between the two virtual machines.
So this is Jaguar.
This has the developer
preview installed on it.
And we can just say JUs 131.
We have to type our password because
this is mucking with stuff in the system,
but now we have 131 enabled.
Java-version.java.
There's 1.3.1.
I can do the same thing with 1.4.
J is 1.4.
Java Dash version.
There it is.
So, what I'm going to show you now is a
taste of what you can do with Java 1.4.
I've written a simple
streaming video server in Java.
It doesn't really do much.
It reads GIFs from a file,
reads them to a network cable,
and then we have a client on the
other side that renders those GIFs.
So what I'm going to do is run
-- I have two versions of it,
one of them written in 1.3.1,
one of them written in 1.4.
So this one is going
to run the 1.4 version.
There it is up and running.
And over in this window,
you probably won't be able to see it,
I'm going to use JUs to
switch over to 1.3.1,
and I will run the 1.3.1
version of the server.
with the 131 classes without 131 NIO,
all that kind of stuff.
So, let's switch over to the client.
This is the client program here.
It's an Objective-C program.
It simply has a thread that reads
the GIFs off the network from the
Java program on the other machine and
just draws one of those threads to
the screen to display the animation.
And the other threads just read
the data and throw it away.
So we can run a lot of threads,
a lot of server connections,
and try and stress test the server.
So let me show you the 131
server here on the left.
This is simply using the one
thread blocking IO per connection.
It's using file input streams
to read the GIFs off the disk.
And it's using simple sockets and
output streams to write the data.
So the standard Java mechanism.
So we can run this.
It runs pretty fast, actually.
Java 131 is not that slow.
We can run several connections.
These background connections
are reading data very fast and
throwing it away very fast.
And we can see that on this connection,
this is using a gigabit Ethernet
network in Apple's hardware.
Whoops.
Oh, damn.
SegFault, cool.
I haven't seen that before.
So that's probably an Objective-C fault.
This is not a Java program.
So we see it getting about
170 megabits per second.
This is a 1000 megabit per second wire,
theoretically.
So that's reasonable performance.
The 1.4 version is using the
new APIs available in 1.4.
It's using a single thread to serve all
the connections using non-blocking I/O.
So that's going to be a lot
less threading overhead.
We don't have to do
thread switches as often.
It's using the byte buffers,
in particular memory mapped byte buffers,
to read in the files.
So we read in the files once and the
data stays in the C heap so you don't
have to copy it into Java space.
Also, all the connections can be
served using that same memory.
We don't have to copy the
memory for each connection.
And finally, we're using the NIO socket
channel to actually send the
data out across the wire.
That also knows about
the new byte buffer APIs,
which means that we don't have to
copy the data in Java from when
we read it from the disk between
the Java various arrays or objects
and then finally to the network.
So we can run it.
It's going to increase straight
from the file into memory
into the network subsystem.
So less memory copying,
less memory overhead, no GC overhead for
these blocks of memory.
So we can run it.
One connection is still pretty fast.
The animation is actually
slowing us down here so it's
just as fast as the 1.3.1 was.
When we increase to two
connections or more connections,
it's running a lot faster.
If you remember the previous one,
it was about at 160, 170.
In fact, it stopped there at 170.
The new version with a single thread
and less memory copying is getting a
significant speed increase in data rate
that the server is managing to send out.
So this is maybe 40, 50% faster,
something like that.
The other thing I want
to show you on the right,
this is a process listing
on the server machine.
So this is the 1.4 Java server process.
It's only one thread,
so it's using 100% CPU on that thread.
This is a dual processor machine,
so the other thread is busy actually
in the kernel network setting.
But it is not using all the CPU.
You can't see it.
It's off to the right.
But that second CPU is
significantly unused right now,
which is good.
So we're getting good data performance.
Objective C is not that bad.
Objective C is nice.
Oh, man.
Objective C is not perfect,
So it's getting better data
rate with 100% of one CPU,
the other CPU not fully used.
If we look at the 1.3.1 version,
it's getting worse data rate like we see.
Note its CPU usage,
166%. So it's using one
CPU 100% of the time.
It's using the other
CPU 70% of that time.
And that last 30% is actually the
kernel doing the actual network IO.
So the 1.3.1 version is totally loading
the system and still getting less data
throughput than the 1.4 version does.
So these 1.4 APIs allow us to get
better IO rates with less CPU usage.
That's pretty cool.
We like that.
This is available in 1.4.
This is using the 1.4 developer
preview you have right now.
We'd love to hear back from
you whether this stuff works.
It's still under development.
It works pretty well except
for the Objective-C side,
but that's not our fault.
We'd like to get your feedback
on the NIO classes and also
the other classes in 1.4:
the Preferences API that shipped,
the IPv6 that's available.
Oh, by the way, the server can serve IPv6
connections with zero extra code.
I don't have a demo for that,
but that's pretty nice.
If you're using any of these things,
we'd like to hear back from you,
hear your feedback, your bug reports,
how well it works for you so we
can make sure that our final 1.4
release is as good as we can make it.
I don't have much more to say.
Best of breed, that's for you to believe
the assertion or not.
As you can see,
the system is getting better
all the time and it's going
to be even better in Jaguar.
We want you to try out the 1.4 VM.
There is an issue though about
talking about it on Java dev.
You're under NDA.
1.4 is only available to
to folks who have Jaguar and we
don't really want you talking
about this stuff on Java Dove.
but we are interested in
your feedback for that.
Still to come, obviously,
the GUI for 1.4.
Even better, shared generation stuff.
The folks at Sun have got some
interesting ideas on how to
move the stuff even further.
We hope to not only help them do it,
but fold it right back in and ship it.
And compiler tuning, of course.
As you have seen and will probably see
again and hear about in more detail,
the Grand Canyon fly-through makes use
of both NIO as well as that greater
compiler technology that is just
beginning to come through for us.
Who do... Oh, yeah,
where do we go from here?
Well, we actually have our feedback
forum right after this.
Most of our Java talks are done.
We only have our
Java performance talk left,
so come give us some feedback
right after this over in room J,
isn't it?
J1.
And then the Java performance
talk on Friday at 9 a.m.
I know it's a little early,
but make it your one,
your first and best talk on Friday.
who to contact.
That's where you can reach me.
That's where you can reach Greg.
Alan Samuel is our
Java Technologies evangelist.
I'm going to bring him up
and let him lead some Q&A,
I think.